README.md, before:

# ADML

**Article Data Markup Language** - A markup language inspired by ArchieML that compiles to JSON.

## Overview

ADML is designed for structured article data, making it easy to write and parse content with a human-friendly syntax that compiles to JSON.

### Features

- ✅ **Primitive types**: Strings, numbers, booleans with automatic type detection
- ✅ **Multiline strings**: Using `::` delimiters
- ✅ **Objects**: Both bracket `{ }` and dot notation syntax
- ✅ **Arrays**: Including nested arrays with `[ ]` syntax
- ✅ **Content arrays**: Structured content blocks with `[[ ]]` syntax
- ✅ **Comments**: Line comments with `//`
- ✅ **Roundtrip support**: Parse ADML → JSON → ADML preserves data
- ✅ **84 comprehensive tests**: Ensuring reliability

## Monorepo Structure

```
ADML/
├── packages/
│   ├── parser/          # @adml/parser - Core ADML parser
│   └── editor/          # @adml/editor - Web-based editor component
├── apps/
│   └── docs/           # Documentation site with interactive playground
└── package.json        # Workspace configuration
```

## Packages

### [@adml/parser](packages/parser/)
Core parser that converts ADML markup to JSON and back.

```bash
npm install @adml/parser
```

```typescript
import { parse, stringify } from '@adml/parser';

const adml = `
title: My Article
author: John Doe
`;

const data = parse(adml);
console.log(data); // { title: 'My Article', author: 'John Doe' }
```

### [@adml/editor](packages/editor/)
Web-based editor component with syntax highlighting powered by CodeMirror.

```bash
npm install @adml/editor
```

```typescript
import { ADMLEditor } from '@adml/editor';

const editor = new ADMLEditor(document.getElementById('editor'), {
  initialValue: 'title: My Article',
  onChange: (value) => console.log(value)
});
```

## Development

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 20+
- npm 9+

### Getting Started

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build all packages
npm run build

# Run tests
npm run test

# Start documentation site
cd apps/docs
npm run dev
```

### Workspace Commands

```bash
# Build all packages
npm run build

# Run tests in all packages
npm run test

# Development mode (watch)
npm run dev
```

## Documentation & Playground

Visit the [documentation site](apps/docs/) to try ADML in an interactive playground.

```bash
cd apps/docs
npm run dev
# Open http://localhost:3000
```

## Documentation

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Detailed architecture and how to extend ADML
- **[DEVELOPMENT.md](DEVELOPMENT.md)** - Development guide and common tasks
- **[Parser README](packages/parser/README.md)** - Full syntax reference
- **[Editor README](packages/editor/README.md)** - Editor API documentation

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development setup and workflow.

For architecture details and how to add new features, see [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md).

## Inspiration

ADML is inspired by [ArchieML](http://archieml.org/), a markup language developed by The New York Times for writing structured text.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

example app with cms and renderer

README.md, after:

# ADML

**Article Data Markup Language** - A markup language inspired by ArchieML that compiles to JSON.

## Overview

ADML is designed for structured article data, making it easy to write and parse content with a human-friendly syntax that compiles to JSON.

### Features

- ✅ **Primitive types**: Strings, numbers, booleans with automatic type detection
- ✅ **Multiline strings**: Using `::` delimiters
- ✅ **Objects**: Both bracket `{ }` and dot notation syntax
- ✅ **Arrays**: Including nested arrays with `[ ]` syntax
- ✅ **Content arrays**: Structured content blocks with `[[ ]]` syntax
- ✅ **Comments**: Line comments with `//`
- ✅ **Roundtrip support**: Parse ADML → JSON → ADML preserves data
- ✅ **133 comprehensive tests**: Ensuring reliability

## Monorepo Structure

```
ADML/
├── packages/
│   ├── parser/          # @adml/parser - Core ADML parser
│   ├── editor/          # @adml/editor - Web-based editor component
│   └── vscode/          # @adml/vscode - VS Code extension
├── apps/
│   ├── docs/            # Documentation site with interactive playground
│   └── example/         # CMS + Article renderer (Astro)
└── package.json         # Workspace configuration
```

## Packages

### [@adml/parser](packages/parser/)
Core parser that converts ADML markup to JSON and back.

```bash
npm install @adml/parser
```

```typescript
import { parse, stringify } from '@adml/parser';

const adml = `
title: My Article
author: John Doe
`;

const data = parse(adml);
console.log(data); // { title: 'My Article', author: 'John Doe' }
```

### [@adml/editor](packages/editor/)
Web-based editor component with syntax highlighting powered by CodeMirror.

```bash
npm install @adml/editor
```

```typescript
import { ADMLEditor } from '@adml/editor';

const editor = new ADMLEditor(document.getElementById('editor'), {
  initialValue: 'title: My Article',
  onChange: (value) => console.log(value)
});
```

### [Example App](apps/example/)
CMS and article renderer demonstrating ADML in a real use case. Built with Astro.

- **Article renderer**: Parses ADML files and renders web pages using a template and component system
- **CMS**: File-based editor with live preview using the `@adml/editor` component

```bash
cd apps/example
npm run dev
# Open http://localhost:4000
```

The renderer uses a dual-layer system:

1. **Templates** define page-level layouts. An ADML file selects its template with `template: default`.
2. **Components** are matched by content item `type`. If no component matches, the type is used as an HTML tag. Mods become CSS classes, props become HTML attributes, and string values are parsed for inline content.

To add a custom component, create an `.astro` file in `src/components/renderer/` and register it in `registry.ts`.

## Development

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 20+
- npm 9+

### Getting Started

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build all packages
npm run build

# Run tests
npm run test

# Start documentation site
cd apps/docs
npm run dev
```

### Workspace Commands

```bash
# Build all packages
npm run build

# Run tests in all packages
npm run test

# Development mode (watch)
npm run dev
```

## Documentation & Playground

Visit the [documentation site](apps/docs/) to try ADML in an interactive playground.

```bash
cd apps/docs
npm run dev
# Open http://localhost:3000
```

## Documentation

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Detailed architecture and how to extend ADML
- **[DEVELOPMENT.md](DEVELOPMENT.md)** - Development guide and common tasks
- **[Parser README](packages/parser/README.md)** - Full syntax reference
- **[Editor README](packages/editor/README.md)** - Editor API documentation

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for development setup and workflow.

For architecture details and how to add new features, see [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md).

## Inspiration

ADML is inspired by [ArchieML](http://archieml.org/), a markup language developed by The New York Times for writing structured text.

## License

MIT
